Welcome to the session
Safari in the Enterprise.
We're, put up a little slide, that's me,
here at last.
I wanted to wait outside a little
bit and make sure that people had
enough time to come in since the
last session went a little long,
so pardon the delay on this.
Here's what we're going to cover today.
A little Safari history
and coming of age,
building applications that just
work from an IT perspective.
I want to give you some development
recommendations as well as
some debugging techniques,
common things that folks run into
when they're trying to get their
enterprise application up and running.
And then we've got some special
guests here to come up and
talk about them dealing with
Safari in their organization,
what they look at as far as
their IT requirements for
browsers and their experiences.
Supporting Safari as well as
PeopleSoft here to talk about their
experience certifying Safari as well.
And then wrap it up with
how to partner with Apple,
how you can make sure that your
enterprise applications work.
The ones that you author and
the ones that you buy as well.
So let's get going.
First of all, I want to start off
with a little road map.
We need to set some context for Safari.
And just to outline,
First of all, I want to start off
with a little road map.
We need to set some context for Safari.
And just to outline,
we want to make sure that we have
something on our platform that
is the best that's out there.
Of course, not all IEs are created equal,
as you've probably found out.
A lot of IT shops would
go and standardize on IE.
We'd support IE on Windows.
We'd support IE on the Mac.
And yet, there were still plenty of
differences there as well.
So what we wanted to do is create
a good target on our platform
for IT application developers
as well as internal developers.
And of course, to support our developers,
we need to have something out there that
you can leverage in your application.
If you're building your own
app that needs these sort
of web application services,
go ahead.
You can use our WebKit APIs,
build an application that takes
advantage of the same sort of
architecture that Safari uses for
its rendering and its JavaScript.
And to, of course,
add the innovative features that
you expect out of Apple computer.
A clean browser, a nice browser with
features that you expect.
Something a little more innovative
than just putting up HTML in a window.
So here's what we delivered.
Open source core.
Nifty drop in here.
JavaScript core, web core,
those are open source libraries created
as wrappers around KHTML and KJS,
which we sourced from the KDE group.
And those of you out there, KDE is,
if you aren't familiar,
is the windowing environment for Linux.
And they use these same core
libraries in their browser,
their window viewer,
and their file viewer, all sorts,
all over the place actually.
It's sort of their main interface
for viewing content in their OS.
On top of it, we wrapped WebKit,
which is a higher level.
Cocoa API, also a C API.
And on top of that,
we just built this thin
veneer that's Safari.
If you look at the stack here,
it's pretty true to how
much is really Safari.
It's about 20% is actual Safari code.
And then the rest is WebKit and
the web core and JavaScript core.
Any changes we make at that
low-level JavaScript core,
WebKit core,
we push back out to open source.
So you're free to go to the
website and pick up that.
Other companies have actually built
browsers on Mac OS X around that.
And you're welcome to contribute
bug fixes or features or
all those things as well.
We also delivered impressive performance.
Our latest iBench scores on the website
at dabble.com indicate that we're by
far the fastest browser on the platform.
With Tiger coming out,
we're of course going to rerun
those benchmarks and ensure
that we keep that place.
Standards compliant.
Number one,
we wanted to make sure that we
gave IT folks a target to shoot
for that wasn't a browser name.
And so we adopted the W3
standards as what we build to.
And the W3C is the standards
body for CSS and DOM.
And we support DOM 2, CSS 1, CSS 2.1,
as well as the latest version
of Safari that you can download,
whether it's the Panther version
or the Tiger version.
Some nifty CSS 3 things that still
haven't quite been vetted out.
And of course,
we have to match the reality of the web.
The web is a big place and
it's not full of standard code.
There's plenty of extensions that
we've had to add just to make sure
that the browser worked with commercial
sites that you use every day.
We still got some distance to go on that,
but we've added some compatibility
extensions that are found in all
other browsers that aren't part
of this standard just to ensure
that we would work properly.
And finally,
we created an extensible browser as well.
You can create plug-ins.
Obviously, the Netscape,
we support the Netscape plug-in model.
Java applets we support.
We added Live Connect with
Safari 1.2 and Java 1.4.2,
which was great.
And we just announced this week a
new Cocoa plug-in model as well.
We've also extended the Netscape
API while working with our partners,
other browser vendors that
are building plug-ins as well,
or using plug-ins to make sure that
the Netscape API is still alive
and supported on multiple browsers.
So here's a timeline
that's pretty interesting.
[Transcript missing]
So going forward, what can you expect?
We're going to focus on consumer
sites like we've always done
and enterprise applications.
It's clear from our requirements
that the browser has to
work in an IT organization,
that it has to perform
relative to other browsers,
other browsers on other platforms.
It needs to support the same
applications and we're going to
make sure that it's the best,
that the Windows users are going to be
drooling over the Safari implementation.
That's definitely a focus.
Increase performance all along.
We always want to make it faster.
And compatibility.
Obviously we're going to step outside
the standards every once in a while
and adopt something that we have
to and then push for it to become a
standard because we're part of the W3.
and a lot of the features that
you've probably heard about here,
if you've gone to any
of the WebKit features,
you'll find out are available
in Safari 1.3 on Panther,
which is great news,
as well as Safari 2.0 in Tiger.
So let me invite Mark Cianca.
He's Director of
Academic Information Systems at
University of Santa Cruz up
and he's going to share some
of his experiences with Safari,
with IT, with all that good stuff.
Mark.
First of all, I want to welcome a
rather august crowd here.
I know it's an afternoon session
and I'm pleased to see so many
people awake at this hour.
That's always a challenge for a speaker.
I'm here not as a technical expert.
I want to make it very clear
I manage technical experts.
So my promise to you today is that I'm
not going to use any management speak,
but you should know I'm also not
going to teach you how to code
a Gronkulator because that's
not really what I'm about here.
What I am going to talk to
you about today is really the
customer's perspective in talking
about use of Safari and support
for Safari within the Enterprise.
UC Santa Cruz is a campus that's
undergone significant growth
in the last 10 to 15 years,
and we have some internal business
initiatives that have to be met
in a way that the institution
deems to be very cost effective.
And web-based deployments help us
meet some of those initiatives.
We have some external
business constraints.
We have to meet as well whenever we're
talking about enterprise applications.
I'll also talk to you a bit about
why we chose to engage vendors
directly and how we chose to do that,
the process, the outcomes,
and take you forward into
where I think we are today.
And based on some of the news
I've heard here this week,
especially about enhancements to WebKit,
what I see is a very bright future
for Safari in the Enterprise.
I want to talk to you a
bit about UC Santa Cruz,
first of all, because all university
administrators have a chronic
inflammation of the marketing gland.
So whenever we get up
in front of a crowd,
we actually talk about summary
facts of our institution.
We're about 15,000 students now.
We're a Tier 1 research institution.
We are poised on the edge
of joining AAU next year,
which makes us among the elite
universities in the United States.
We are ranked first in the
nation in space sciences.
So those of you who wonder how the
heck they figured out how to make the
blur in the Hubble telescope work,
that was our team at
UC Santa Cruz who did that.
We did adaptive optics.
We're second in the world in
physical sciences as well.
We're heavily into research.
We're heavily into science.
And we're heavily into supporting
faculty who like to live their
life at the edge of technology.
So that's the kind of environment
that we support at UC Santa Cruz.
I'm on the stage today because
we are currently most of the way
through a very major enterprise
application implementation.
We are currently in an enterprise-wide
deployment of PeopleSoft's ERP suite
and specifically their enterprise
portal and their application
called Student Administration,
plus the Cognos
Business Intelligence suite.
Those are the big elements
of this implementation.
We're moving from an environment in
which every user of the system had
a nice telnet session into a 3270
environment onto the IBM mainframe,
which is a remarkably fast environment,
but a remarkably uninviting
graphic environment for users.
The critical success factors
for our project were defined
pretty early on in the project.
Whatever solution we found for
our end-user environment had
to be platform independent.
That is to say,
we couldn't favor PCs over Macintosh,
over Linux, over anything.
We had to support a
heterogeneous environment,
and that was defined as a very
critical factor for our success.
Perceived speed was going
to be very important for us
because moving from 3270,
we had users who were accustomed
to lightning-fast speed,
but who had very little tolerance
for anything other than environment.
And I had this other little
kicker I had to take care of,
which was minimal to no deployment costs.
While I love them dearly,
I have computing coordinators on campus
who get quite edgy when new systems come
online and they're required to support
end-users in a major deployment process.
We want to minimize that
or completely eliminate it.
Some of the deployment challenges that
we had is that we've been in a rolling
phase deployment for quite some time now.
We started a project,
maybe I shouldn't bring this
up with PeopleSoft in the room,
but the first, we actually started
with a different vendor.
The product that we bought was
actually acquired by another company,
and that product was killed.
So then we turned to PeopleSoft,
and we're hopeful that the Department of
Justice sees its way to win a
particular lawsuit for us shortly here.
As we move forward with PeopleSoft,
the other challenge that we've faced
is that their core technology stack in
the applications that we've licensed
actually run on two different versions.
So that's another consideration
that we've had to look at.
Student administration
stack is on PeopleTools 8.1,
and then our enterprise portal is on 8.4.
It may not mean a lot
unless you use PeopleSoft,
but it is something of a
challenge in the way that the
browser reacts to the software.
And our business intelligence suite
was actually licensed fairly recently,
and we demoed that product
on OS 9 at the time,
and using Netscape 476 because
that's all they certified for.
This is the environment
we're moving from.
Any of you who've used a 3270 screen
before know what this looks like.
This is a typical student screen
that we look at day after day
after day in the old environment.
But what we're moving toward
is this broader portal-based
environment where staff,
faculty, and students will be able
to access self-service,
administrative services,
and functionality through
a portal environment that
we're pushing to them today.
So that's at UC Santa Cruz.
How we prioritized our deployments
was pretty interesting.
Many of our users assume that if
an application is browser-based,
then there's no real deployment issues.
And we've found, of course,
that that's not quite the case.
In fact, it's quite the opposite.
We know that there's not
parity between browsers,
even on the same platform,
let alone between platforms.
And I think sometimes that's a good
thing because it pushes browser
development continually if you've
got feature sets that are available
for some but not for others.
But the other thing that happened,
and that really kind of engendered
this relationship with the vendors,
was that we began a consolidation
of our IT environment at
UC Santa Cruz about a year ago.
We were charged with consolidating
a very confederated environment
and bringing it central.
To do that,
we undertook a very large data
collection effort just to find out what
was out there and who was doing what.
Another issue that we looked at
was that if we encountered platform
differences that were too great,
we had options that no
one wanted to look at.
One of those would be to use Citrix,
for example, to ensure common experiences
for both Mac and PC users.
So those are some of the
things that we looked at.
When I think about vendor relationships,
I actually have two working tenets.
First of all, from my perspective,
the sales cycle is always open.
This means that I always have the
opportunity to negotiate with all
of my vendors at any point in a
license relationship and to build a
relationship that we have with them,
because at some point in the future,
we're likely going to be
buying more software licenses.
So for me,
the sales cycle is always open.
The other tenet I always assume is
that sales staff always over-promise
and typically under-deliver.
So we've all been through a cycle
where we hear from sales staff,
yeah, we can do that.
But what they fail to mention
is behind that answer is,
and it'll cost you $2 million
of customization to get
that code to work for you.
Or you're going to have to buy an
infrastructure that will cost you
25 full-time employees just to keep
that environment up and running.
The other thing that we have long known
is that sales staff almost never use
Macintoshes to demo their products.
So one of the things that
UC Santa Cruz has instituted is a
requirement that any vendor who now
comes in and demos an enterprise
application has to demo on a Macintosh.
You see a lot of scared sales
guys coming in to do demos,
but if it doesn't work for a sales guy,
it's certainly not going to work for us.
So we need to ensure that the products
we're looking at from the get-go can
be used by a Macintosh population.
Well, why is that important?
And just this is another little
bullet point that I want to point out.
When we first looked at Cognos,
it was marginally acceptable,
but there was a Mac solution,
and it meant we didn't
have to use Citrix,
and that was another big plus for us.
So a challenge in getting vendors
to understand why we were asking
them to demo on Macs was to be able
to show them the value of having a
product that worked out of the box,
so to speak.
So like I said earlier,
we had this consolidation going on,
and we, as a part of that,
actually a colleague here in the
audience was part of an effort
to undertake a large part of
data collection about the campus.
And what we learned was
some very interesting stuff.
If you can see that graphic very well.
This is just a simple
bar chart that shows you.
All hardware, non-academic use hardware
on the UC Santa Cruz campus,
there's just over 7,500,
7,600 machines that
are accounted for here.
And in this environment, 41% are Mac,
43% are Wintel, 13,
almost 14% are Linux or
other flavors of Unix.
And the rest are, you know,
the odd K-Pro that's still running
or B-Box or Nextcube or whatever.
So there's a lot of stuff that's out
there that's still running from 1982.
So that's the entire distribution.
When we narrow it down a bit and we look
simply at laptops and desktops in use,
you begin to see that Mac becomes
the dominant platform.
So we've got just over 45% Mac users,
43% Windows, and 10% Unix, Linux,
whatever on, again, desktops and laptops.
But where this becomes significant
for us is in the distribution of data.
And that's the administrative
users' hardware.
These are the people who are
banging on machines all day long as
administrative support staff in the
business function of the institution.
So when I get to this point,
57% of my users are Mac users.
That means the predominant
population that I have to be
able to support is Mac OS based.
41% is Wintel.
We've got 35 machines
that are something else,
Linux probably.
And then just a smattering of machines
that are unidentified in this survey.
This becomes really, really important.
If you look at the blue column,
these are users who are accustomed
to calling the help desk.
If you look at the purple column,
these are people who are
pretty self-sufficient.
So whatever I introduce has to
continue to provide them with the
ease of use and the look and feel
that they're accustomed to in using
their machines day in and day out.
So when we landed on PeopleSoft,
that had the promise of providing
them with that kind of experience.
But this is the kind of number that
I now show to vendors when I say,
listen, you've got to support Mac.
That's my primary population.
And because it just so happens that
my office also supports Help Desk,
this becomes really important
to me in terms of workload.
So we all had early Safari experiences.
Mark showed you a timeline.
Well,
here's what we learned with PeopleSoft.
It worked, but it's slow, baby.
It was really, really slow.
1.0, 1.1.
PeopleSoft performance
was marginal at best.
We had some display issues.
Intense table structures
didn't work very well at all.
And the sad thing was
Cognos didn't work at all.
In fact,
looking forward to the updates to WebKit,
that's really when we'll begin to use
Cognos on Safari with some confidence.
Right now, we've got people using
alternate browsers.
Navigation was crippled.
I couldn't do slicing
and dicing on data cubes.
And it was frustrating.
So we asked for some help.
[Transcript missing]
Put you back to sleep here.
This is a developers conference,
so I wanted to make sure that I had
some recommendations for folks that
are out there building new sites,
sort of what to shoot for when you're
going to support Safari when it's part
of the stack that you support out there,
and give you some guidelines.
Because I don't think there's a
really straightforward example
out there of how to go and build
something that's supported by Safari.
And it's really, it's quite simple,
so let's just start in.
It's designed to standards.
Like I said in the introduction,
the W3 defines the standards
for HTML and the DOM.
Hopefully those aren't new words to you.
If they are,
it's the structure of a particular page.
The DOM addresses the
particular functions,
JavaScript functions that
access the pieces on that page.
The W3C also defines
the standard for CSS,
cascading style sheets.
That's the layout and the
presentation portion of it.
So designing the standards vis-a-vis the
W3 is the best way to build for Safari.
And the specifications are
available at the W3C website.
Really quite straightforward
to go and read what they have.
There's also slews of self-help
and documentation associated with
supporting standards out there.
And the benefit is that it's
supported by modern browsers as well.
My typical message is not, hey,
Safari's great,
make sure that you support it.
It's really,
Safari does great with the standards.
Make sure that you support it.
Make sure that you support the standards.
Put the power back into your hands.
Support the standards.
The browser vendors will
have to do the same.
And they actually do.
IE, the one that you all know and love,
and Netscape, Mozilla, and even iCab,
or anybody familiar with iCab out there,
does well with the standards.
So build to the standards,
support all the modern browsers.
Make pages that are
well-formed and valid.
Another very important point to make.
Ensure that your HTML is well-formed,
meaning if you've got a begin tag,
make sure that if the
specification requires,
you've got an end tag.
It's faster.
It lets the browser,
it keeps the browser actually
from having to second guess
what you've got on your page,
what you're trying to do.
Instead of having to put the end
tags around and tidy up your code
before it draws it to the screen,
it's already there.
It has to work less.
So it's faster,
it's a little less fragile
because when we start
interpreting what you want to do,
sometimes we get it wrong.
Sometimes we crash.
Ensure that your pages
include a valid doc type.
This is critical.
A doc type is your way of communicating
to the browser what's the standard
that this particular page supports.
What's that DTD that should be
fulfilled by the content on the page?
A doc type is very important.
If you don't have a
doc type in your page,
Safari will degrade to a standards minus,
minus, minus.
So it's faster.
It's a little less fragile.
Because when we start
interpreting what you want to do,
sometimes we get it wrong.
Sometimes we crash.
Ensure that your pages
include a valid doc type.
This is critical.
A doc type is your way of
communicating to the browser.
What's the standard that this
particular page supports?
this type implementation,
sometimes called quirk or quirks or
compatibility mode where we do a lot
of second guessing and you'll find
out that we might make things look a
little different than they look in IE.
Ensure that your pages are valid.
There's a standard out there.
Ensuring that it's valid against that
standard is another way of ensuring
that you've given us a doc type,
you've told us how it should be,
make sure that you've checked
it to ensure that it is.
There's a validator for HTML at the W3,
which is great.
It's a website you can go
and you can upload a file or
you can point it to a URL.
You can also download this.
It's all Perl and run it
on a machine internally.
And we'll have a recipe on the
developer site up shortly on that.
And you can also validate
your CSS at the same website.
And it's really quite nice.
It'll give you a page that shows you
exactly what's wrong in your code.
And then you have tools probably built
into many of the editors that you use
for doing validation and checking.
So make sure you explore
those and find out what they
support as far as validation.
Validation is extremely important.
Be browser agnostic.
How many times have you seen a page where
it's actually looking for a particular
version of a particular web browser?
The best thing to do is to
avoid all that user agent,
sometimes called browser sniffing logic,
if at all possible.
And there's ways to get around
it using object detection.
If you've got a page that has some
complexity in it that you're afraid
that certain browsers can't support,
it's pretty straightforward to go
and see if it's supported without
looking at the version of the browser.
If you're browser sniffing,
then you find that you'll have to
constantly update your sniffing
code to make sure it goes and
supports the particular functionality
that you think is on the margins.
Object detection,
basically it's just checking a particular
function before you go and call it.
And if it returns undefined,
then you know it doesn't exist and
you can branch around it and have
some other code that will function
appropriately or degrade nicely.
Once that particular function
is supported in the browser,
it'll just work, should just work,
you should test it,
but it should just work and you won't
have to go and update your sniffing code.
Number one, use the W3 standard way of
accessing page objects on a page.
This is probably the number one issue
I run into when I'm working with
developers trying to figure out why
their particular site isn't working.
Get element by ID for folks trying to
access an element on a page in dynamic
HTML is the way to do it via standards,
and all the modern browsers support this.
I'll show an example coming up a little
bit later about how to actually do that.
and get involved.
Help us keep the standards relevant.
You can do that by pushing the vendors,
joining the W3C,
just really staying on top of it.
There's many good
sources for vendor type,
sorry,
for standards-based information and
here's some I'm putting up here.
Dave Hyatt, the last one,
is an Apple employee, great source.
They've got all sorts of recommendations,
example code,
stories about why standards are important
and why they feel there's a real business
case for supporting the standards,
independent of the sort of the
WYSIWYG things that you can do.
And last but not least,
buy standards-based products.
Push the vendors to make sure
that they're supporting it.
They'll come back to us and say,
"There's a bug in your browser.
You say you support the standard.
Here's a standard call.
It's not working.
Please fix it." And we're happy to do it.
We want to be the best standards-based
browser on the platform.
Great, so I just want to run through
one more set of things,
just some debugging
techniques real quick.
If you've got a page that doesn't work,
a site that doesn't work,
run through some of these.
Turn-on exception logging is probably
the first step that you want to
do any time you're going through
a debugging process with an existing
site or a site that you're creating.
And what it does is it displays the
JavaScript and parsing exceptions
into the console on the Macintosh.
And it's getting better, I promise.
If any of you out there -- how
many have seen the debugging
menu and tried to debug?
Okay, so it's getting a lot better.
And actually,
Kevin here in the front row is working
to make sure that that's a lot better.
So if you load your 1.3
preview or the 2.0 version of
Safari that you see in Tiger,
you'll see that we've got a pop-up
window that provides that same sort
of functionality that you used to
see in the console but only better.
It's not quite Venkman,
but we're working on it.
To turn it on, you use the terminal.
Type in a bit of code.
This is also available on the website,
how to turn it on.
Basically, turn on our debug menu.
Once you get the debug menu turned on,
then you can select log
JavaScript exceptions.
And they'll show up in
the console application.
Another good thing to check
for on websites that aren't
working is for browser sniffing.
I talked about this before,
and we have a workaround
for taking a look.
You can pretend to be another browser
once you've got the debug menu turned on.
A good practice is to go
to the site with Safari,
see what it looks like.
Go to the site with a Windows machine,
Go to the site with Safari,
choose the Windows MSI E setting
from the spoofing debug menu,
and then hit the site again.
And if the site just works,
then you know it's the server that's
looking at the browser and saying,
"I don't support you," or "I've never
heard of you before," and then rejecting,
sending you back the wrong code,
branching you in the wrong direction.
This is another great way to find
out if something just works and
you have to change the server.
Look for the two browser trap.
This was another extremely common issue
that we've had with websites out there,
especially legacy sites,
sites that were built to
support Netscape or IE.
And it was accessing elements
on a page with document.all,
the IE-specific way of doing it,
or document.layers,
the Netscape 4.7 way of
accessing elements on a page.
Here's a sample code.
Here's what it traditionally looks like.
Somebody checks to see if it's IE,
and if not, assume that it's Netscape.
We don't support either of these methods,
document.all or document.layers.
And that's actually something we
thought about doing at one point,
but we kept getting so much Windows code
as a result of supporting some of
these compatibility features that
it made sites actually work a lot worse.
So supporting the
standard was a good thing.
Basically,
you need to ensure that there's
a get element by ID case,
basically a W3-supported case
of accessing elements on a page.
And here's an example right here.
Put it at the very top.
W3, get element by ID.
All the modern browsers will fall
into that case and get handled.
And then there's if-then-else
code that degrades nicely for
older versions of the browser.
Here's a quick fix that I came up with
to fix a site recently that had thousands
of pages with document.all on it.
It's kind of a useful hack.
You can just go and define document.all.
If it's not defined,
go ahead and define it.
You can create functions sitting
off the document on your own.
And this just calls getElementsByTagName,
throws all the elements in there,
and then this document.all
function is defined for all
the subsequent code on a page.
It's a really nice hack
just to bring the site up,
see if it actually works with this hack.
then you can go and do the right
thing as on the previous code example.
Another good thing to try if a site's not
working for you is to validate the page.
I told you before the W3C has
validators for CSS and HTML.
So you can go to them,
take the source off a particular
page that's not validating,
and upload it.
See what it says.
It'll point out all sorts
of things that are wrong.
And here's an example here,
saying that it's not 4.0 transitional.
So this page evidently had 4.0
transitional in its doc type.
And here's all the errors that it gave.
And it was quite extensive
actually for this site.
I don't remember which one it was.
Respect the cross-domain
frame security rules.
It's a mouthful, but it's pretty common
in portaled environments,
universities and such,
where you've got pieces that
you're pulling from all sorts
of different organizations,
little portlets that you've built
to support a student system and
then some other system over here and
you want to combine them on a page.
Well, there's a rule for frames and
it's pretty much the same sandbox
rules that are out there for Java.
It's that in one frame,
you can't access the code
elements on another frame if they
don't come from the same domain.
And so we found out that a lot of
folks were running into this sort
of issue and merely serving up
that portlet from the same domain,
they were able to work just fine.
The other functionality that
they were expecting just worked.
So yeah, here's the line saying that.
And here's a typical error
that you'll see in the console.
If you've turned on the
debugging to the console,
you'll see this in there and it's pretty
clear that this is what's happening.
I've run into this quite a bit.
Check the default cookie policy.
There's some defaults in Safari that
catch people by surprise because
they're not what they're expecting
necessarily based on a Windows browser
perhaps or Netscape's preferences.
Sometimes it's just the
defaults that are gotchas.
And the default cookie issue is generally
found on the same sort of sites,
ones that are using portals
where they're trying to write
a cookie from one particular
domain and one from another one.
And these things are important,
the fact that we can block these
cookies from a privacy perspective.
Our users really enjoy this
particular feature and it's
probably bitten quite a few people.
And the default is
extremely conservative.
Here's a picture of it.
What it basically says is only accept
cookies from sites that you navigate to.
So if you have a page that has
a couple frames on it and you're
trying to write out a cookie in
one frame and that URL isn't the
same URL that's in the top banner.
That the user went to,
then it's not going to
write out that cookie.
And subsequently you'll go to another
page and things just aren't working
because you were depending on that.
So this is another great thing.
All you need to do is turn on
except always in the preferences.
And if it just starts working,
then you know that that's
the particular gotcha.
Check for pop-up blocking.
This bit a lot of people.
It's an extremely popular
feature of Safari.
Everybody runs with it on
and traditionally a lot of
portal type applications,
homegrown application sites that you
build in IT will have pop-up windows
on page load or on page unload.
It applies to the window.open
function and it blocks those
irritating pop-ups that you get
when you go to commercial sites.
Keeps those commercials from coming out.
Well, our customers love it.
A lot of them turn it on
and then they end up saying,
well, your particular
application's not working.
So this is a great thing to check.
And it's basically associated with
window.open and it prevents any user,
it prevents any opening of windows
or calls of that function that's
not elicited by a user action.
Clicking on a window.
Clicking on a button.
Doing some sort of action.
Window.opens aren't allowed in
unload handlers or onload handlers
and that's traditionally where these
pop-up advertisements come in and
sometimes you'll see this in your code.
And once again, it's a default.
You can turn it on, you can turn it off.
In the preferences,
there's the checkbox for it.
There's also a setting underneath
the Safari menu as well.
And last but not least,
turn on the keyboard link navigation.
A lot of folks are used to using IE and
tabbing around elements on a page and
they go to Safari and they see that
that doesn't work and they complain.
They say your website's not
working or Safari's not working.
Well, it's really there,
but it's off by default.
Our preference is option tab.
And we can talk about whether
we should have done that or not,
but the preference is to
use the option key instead.
And this is something that
you can change as well.
So through the preferences again,
choose the radio button
that says tab between links.
And once again,
you've got the same sort of functionality
that folks were used to having in IE.
Great, so that's sort of the
debugging techniques.
I want to have Jesper Andersen
come up and talk a little bit
about his debugging techniques.
Suffering through
Safari at early versions,
but working wholeheartedly with
us to make sure that we got their
applications running smoothly.
Jesper.
Thank you, Mark.
I am responsible for all the tools
and technology at PeopleSoft,
so I appreciate the opportunity
to speak to all of you here today.
I thought it would be a good idea to kind
of give you an overview of PeopleSoft.
Thanks to Larry and his evil empire,
we've got great brand
recognition these days.
Over the past year,
it's really grown from
a brand perspective.
But in case you didn't know,
PeopleSoft is now,
since our acquisition of JD Edwards,
which was about a year ago,
just over a year ago,
now the second largest provider
of enterprise application
software in the world.
We have about 11,000 customers,
actually closer to 12,000
customers nowadays.
The kind of software we
run for these customers,
the customers vary between small
customers and very large customers.
But just to give you a perspective,
we have the largest companies
in the world run our software.
And the software is
truly mission critical.
The kind of software we build and
sell to our customers and support
and help our customers with are
used for things like payroll.
So if our software doesn't work,
people don't get paid.
It's that simple.
And that's never popular in businesses.
I'm sure you can appreciate that.
As an example,
I know in the Apple community,
there are many contractors.
We have a lot of staffing
companies that use our software.
And obviously, they use our payroll
types of applications.
And they're certainly very critical.
And they're certainly critical in nature.
The kind of applications we have,
obviously,
we're dominating the space of human
resources or human capital management,
as we call it.
Financial management is a
very strong area for us.
So general ledger, accounts payable,
accounts receivable,
traditional ERP applications.
We are doing well in CRM,
customer relationship management.
We're doing well in supplier
relationship management.
With the acquisition of J.D.
Edwards, we acquired one of the
leading manufacturers.
We have the largest manufacturing
application vendors in the world.
Most people associate
manufacturing with SAP,
our big competitor from Europe.
It's not a well-known fact that J.D.
Edwards, from a manufacturing
software perspective,
actually have more installations
in North America than SAP.
So by acquiring J.D.
Edwards,
we acquired a large install base.
And I think everybody would agree that's
mission-critical software as well.
We have customers in 150 countries.
We have customers across the world.
That means globalization
is very important to us.
That means working in many languages,
having the ability to essentially
support different types of applications
with local legislative types of
flavors of our applications is
very critical for our customers.
Also, PeopleSoft's always been known
for our cross-platform support.
It's been a true north for PeopleSoft
ever since the day we started.
We are by far the enterprise application
vendor that supports the largest
multitude of operating systems,
databases, browsers,
as we'll talk about today,
application servers.
Just to give you an idea,
an operating system,
a very large portion of our revenue
comes from very large companies
that are running mainframe.
IBM, ZOS,
the operating system is important to us.
Also, the MVS, slightly older operating
system on mainframe.
Any flagship.
Any type of driver of Unix you want.
Linux, very important to us today.
We primarily are running with
Java infrastructure at a mid-tier.
And that means we ship our applications
with WebSphere and with WebLogic,
the two leading Java-centric
application servers.
And obviously,
we have a pure Internet architecture,
which we're pretty proud about.
We were the first company to
truly run all of our applications
in nothing but a browser.
Where most of our competitors still had
flavors of their product that were heavy,
if you like, in nature.
Either thick Windows clients or at
least Java applet types of clients.
Many of them still do.
Whereas we already, ever since 2000,
ran in a pure Internet architecture.
And that obviously means,
given the critical nature
of our applications and the
different types of applications,
that if you're having a
pure Internet architecture,
you're going to be able to
de-stress browsers and have been
stressing browsers ever since 2000.
And so, that's obviously key,
according to the subject
we're talking about today.
So where are the Macs in our world?
Macs are very important to PeopleSoft.
Higher education, and Mark was one of the
representatives from one of our
customers in higher education,
is an absolute key area,
key industry for PeopleSoft,
and I think it's fair to say
we dominate that industry.
Higher education means payrolls,
it means student administration systems,
and Mark showed you one of the kind of
screenshots of one of those applications,
but there's an awful lot of functionality
that's going into those areas.
It's not just managing the students,
it's also managing all the
employees at the university,
their payroll, their benefits,
their training programs,
all of those kind of things.
So that's an important area for us,
University of Santa Cruz being one
of our good customers in that area,
but it spans the world, Ivy League,
universities, all the big universities
in North America are pretty
much PeopleSoft customers.
Healthcare and pharmaceutical is an
important area for us and for Apple.
Companies like Genentech has an
awful lot of Apple computers in their
labs and use PeopleSoft as well.
So another key area where Macs
are important for us as an
enterprise software company.
Government key, I can't mention all the
different government agencies
that use our software,
but I can let you imagine who they are,
and there's an awful lot
of Macs in that area.
I think also it's a great
opportunity to be able to use the
software that's available to us.
So if you think about higher education,
one of the things that's key there is,
and I'll talk more about that,
whether you're a power
user or a transient user,
whether you use one type of our
application or the other application.
Financial services and in
general the service industries
is an area where PeopleSoft
traditionally have been strong,
whereas maybe SAP has dominated more
the asset intensive industries and
the manufacturing types of industries.
But those are some of the areas
where people are very interested
in and they're very interested in
and they're very interested in.
So it is very important and has
always been very important for us
to support Macs in the right kind
of way as a first class citizen
of the PeopleSoft infrastructure.
So given that, why is Safari important?
Customer demand should be obvious
based on what I just talked about here,
but also if you think about the
user experience and both of the
marks talked about that before.
You know, prior to Safari coming out,
we were forced to work with
Netscape and work with IE.
And it was frustrating for our
users for the same reasons that the
two previous speakers talked about,
but it was actually equally frustrating
to us as a development organization
because when Microsoft came
out with newer versions of IE,
they do develop, you know,
smart new utilities,
great features that we can take advantage
of in our development and in our,
you know,
hunt for better and better applications.
But it's no good when those same features
are not available on the Mac because
IE on the Mac was always lagging behind.
And that forced us to
code to a kind of common,
lowest common denominator.
And so we were always forced
to compromise and were always,
or weren't always,
but were falling behind in certain areas,
you know, to some of our competitors who
just coded for that one platform.
And that was a real challenge for us.
So when we, when we first saw, you know,
Safari 1.0, we just,
that was like a sigh of relief.
That was, thank God,
that Apple is going into this area.
And actually, even more important for us,
that Apple was so committed to standards
like Mark was just talking about W3C.
Absolute key for us because we
use things like DOM and cascading
style sheets heavily in the way
that we code our application.
There's just no way to make browser
experience interactive if you don't.
And so the fact that,
that Apple made it very clear from the
get-go that they were going to code very
clearly to the standards was huge for us.
If Apple had not done that and
we needed that strong support,
we would have had to either
fork our code everywhere or
code some kind of an abstraction
layer over these kind of things.
And that would have caused performance
problems and that would have just,
just absolutely been a nightmare.
[Transcript missing]
It's probably also worth pointing out,
and I alluded a little bit to it earlier,
the difference in users and
what their expectations are
of a PeopleSoft application.
So in the case of Mark and
the University of Santa Cruz,
it's important for him that we have an
application that is really primarily
used sometimes by self-service users.
That's students that are sitting at home
or in the dorm or wherever they might be.
They have a normal browser and
they access the University of
Santa Cruz website to see what
kind of courses they're taking,
just like they're accessing Amazon.com
or eBay.com or wherever they're going.
It is normal self-service application.
And that's one type of user.
It's kind of the infrequent user.
They don't access it very much.
It happens once in a while.
And they use their Macs in their
home for that kind of thing.
But we also have power users.
Imagine you are a data
entry or order entry clerk.
Or imagine you are one of these
types of users that sit in front
of your screen all day long.
You do not want an Amazon.com
experience with that.
You do not want to have your hand
on your browser or on the mouse
all the time and point and click.
And you certainly don't.
You don't want the screens
to refresh every time there's
something you want to pick.
These people come from
mainframe environments.
And the screen Mark showed you
earlier may not look pretty,
but it's very functional.
It's tap, tap, tap, look ahead,
click down, Bing, select.
They've been used to data
entry in that kind of world.
And it's fast.
It's efficient.
And so our applications
have to mirror that.
If our applications don't match that,
our customers aren't happy.
That's a power user.
Some of those users never use the mouse.
They just want to be able to look ahead,
tap ahead, all of those kind of things.
And so we must support that same kind
of interactivity in our application.
That's a very different user
model than the self-service type
of user we talked about before.
Accessibility is key for us, right?
Especially in the government kind of
area I talked about at universities.
It's important everywhere,
but it's a requirement,
a legal requirement when you're
dealing with the government.
Right?
Data section 508 compliance
requirement is very important.
The readers that need to be able to
apply to the screen to magnify must
work within these kind of applications.
And obviously ease of use is key and
was one of the things that really
attracted us to the Safari browser
as well because of the visual appeal
in the normal kind of tradition of
Apple that people have come to expect.
[Transcript missing]
Lastly, just kind of want to say that,
you know, this was a team effort.
As you can see here,
this was the team I had
on it at PeopleSoft.
Not a large team.
This was not that tough.
I would tell all of you if
most of you are Mac people,
so you're already probably supporting it.
But if you don't,
and if you have a large website
and all applications and you are,
you know, worried about how much
effort is this going to take,
it is not that hard.
The reason why I had to have, you know,
even a team of this side was just
because of the critical nature
of the applications that we have
that I talked about earlier.
We had great support from Apple directly
from the development team,
a couple of technical contacts.
I'm sure they were working other
things all the time as well,
but they were available to us 24-7.
So we got all the support we needed,
super response, and it was a great,
believe me, from all the fires I'm
fighting on a daily basis,
this one was not even really on my radar.
And I think I had one call with
my Apple counterpart during the
whole kind of cycle that we had.
So I think it was a
very successful outcome.
We've just today actually with
this conference announced a
couple of press releases in,
you know, not only the availability
but also the intent we have.
We are now available on
PeopleSoft Enterprise,
which is the product line
that was the traditional
PeopleSoft that I talked about.
But we're also busy certifying
our Enterprise One product line,
which is our former J.D.
Edwards One World product
line on Safari as well.
That will get us more into
the manufacturing and the
mid-market space as well.
And again, we're doing so because we're
encouraged by the ease with
which we were able to do this.
So I would say as a conclusion, you know,
this was important for us.
This just completely
underlines our mantra,
which is, you know,
we need access anywhere to our
applications for our customers.
And with this, we have ensured between
Apple and PeopleSoft.
That Mac users get the best
in class user experience of
using PeopleSoft applications.
So I appreciate your time and
we'll be available for Q&A as well.
Thank you.
All right, so I just want to wrap it
up with a quick overview of,
you know, what are you going to
do on your side with,
if you have the same sort of
issues that Mark Cianca had,
or if you have an enterprise
product and you want to work with
Apple to ensure that it's supported,
whether you're writing it yourself
or it's something that you need
to support your organization.
Just sort of number one is to make sure
you've joined the developer connection.
Obviously, you're all here,
so you've all been part of it.
But make sure that QA folks,
make sure that other folks that
are using the Safari browser in
their day-to-day lives are part of
this so that they can feed us bugs,
give us feedback, help us get this right.
You know what the site looks like.
Log in.
Just a quick add for the folks that
have access to the Safari site,
to the API.
The ADC have pre-release views of Safari,
pre-release views of Mac OS X,
which includes Safari.
So if you've got a site that
you're trying to get up and
running and you want to find out
how things are going vis-a-vis the
fixes that you've submitted to us,
being part of the ADC is a
way to download and test those
early versions of the browser.
See how we're doing.
Let us know if we broke
something along the way.
Sort of join in the co-development
effort to make sure that we've
got the best browser out there.
And so when we GM,
we don't release something that--
that's not going to work for you.
File bugs against Safari.
Here's the screen.
Bugreporter.apple.com.
Don't use the bug button.
Go and create a real bug for us.
That's the quickest way to
get something addressed.
Your submissions drive our priorities,
and the more concrete they are,
the better off.
Don't assume that somebody else has
submitted the same bug you're submitting.
If you see something,
please go to our website,
make sure you log in,
give us a bug report,
log it against Safari.
We want to knock these down.
We want to make sure that we're
the best browser on the platform.
Here's the URL to go and do it if
you're not aware of where to go.
[Transcript missing]